Document discussion progress on revertible forking/cloning API (#22642)
microsoft/FluidFramework: packages/dds/tree/docs/wip/revertible-fork-api.md

# Revertible API

This `Revertible` API is the entry point for allowing SharedTree users to revert changes to the tree, enabling features like Undo and Redo.
This document provides context for the `Revertible` API to help inform past and future decisions.
This document isn't meant to be wholly comprehensive but rather to document prior reasoning and discussion to help "fill in the gaps" about how the API landed in its current state.

> For more background on Undo/Redo, see the following documents:
>
> * [Undo.md](../main/undo.md)
> * [v1-undo.md](../main/v1-undo.md)

## Revert Operation

The fundamental operation that `Revertibles` are trying to accomplish is to:

> 1. Revert a commit in the history of some branch
> 2. Apply the reverted commit to the head of that branch

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Generate an inverse commit for a specific commit in the history of some branch
2. Apply the inverse commit to the head of that branch
```

> An undo/redo stack is a common use of revertibles, but other "undo-ish" data structures might be appropriate for an application as well. 

Importantly, revertibles are only allocated if the user requests them to be.
When a new commit is applied to the tree, an event (`"commitApplied"`) fires which provides the user a _function_ that they can call _if_ they want to allocate a revertible.
If they do this, then they are also responsible for disposing the revertible as soon as they no longer need it (for example, if it ends up too far back in their undo stack).
In this way, revertibles are given the minimal lifetime possible (if they are given a life at all) in order to reduce the overhead of maintaining them.

## Branches

How do revertibles interact with SharedTree [branches](../main/indexes-and-branches.md)?
Note that a `Revertible` has a parameterless `revert()` method.
Under the hood it is performing the fundamental `revert(commit, branch)` operation and therefore the revertible must be implicitly associated with both a commit _and_ a branch. This means that different branches will have different revertible objects, even for reverting the same commit.

> This is accomplished by allowing revertibles to be _cloned_ (or "forked"). Cloning a revertible produces a new revertible which is associated with the provided branch - so, when `revert()` is called on that new revertible, it applies the reverted commit to the head of that branch.

Reviewer: It's not clear from the text here that this cloning process involves providing another branch for the clone to be associated with.

Reviewer: I guess it's covered in detail below, but it would still be nice to clarify here.

> The original "non-cloned" revertible, which came from the `"commitApplied"` event, is implicitly associated with the branch that raised the event.

There is a particular scenario in which this is necessary for a user.
If a user wants to create a new branch and allow that branch to undo past the commit at which it was created (i.e., undo "back into its parent branch"), then all the relevant revertibles from the parent branch must be cloned and the clones must be associated with the new branch. For example:

1. Parent branch **P** appends commits _X_, _Y_, and _Z_.
2. Child branch **C** branches off of the current head (_Z_) of **P**.
3. The user wants to undo _Z_ and then _Y_, but on branch **C**, not on branch **P**.

>    This would leave **P** untouched and leave **C** with a state including only the commit _X_.

Reviewer: This sentence is confusing because it mixes up the commits that are on a branch and the state of the branch.
```suggestion
   This would leave **P** untouched and add _UndoOf(Z)_, _UndoOf(Y)_ onto **C**.
```

In such a scenario the user must clone the revertibles that were acquired from **P** and associate them with **C**.
Typically this would look something like the following.

1. Parent branch **P** appends commits _X_, _Y_, and _Z_.
    * The revertibles for _X_, _Y_ and _Z_ are appended to the undo stack for **P**.
2. Child branch **C** branches off of the current head (_Z_) of **P**.

>     * The revertibles for _X_, _Y_ and _Y_ are cloned, and put at the beginning of the undo stack for **C**.

Reviewer 2: I think this should be _X_, _Y_ and _Z_.

3. The user wants to undo _Z_ and then _Y_, but on branch **C**, not on branch **P**.

>    This would leave **P** untouched and leave **C** with a state including only the commit _X_.

Reviewer: See above

    * The user pops and reverts the top two revertibles on **C**'s undo stack (and may or may not dispose them, depending on whether or not they might be needed again later).

> When a branch is disposed, all of the revertibles that were cloned with respect to it are automatically disposed too.

### Cloning

Revertibles are cloned via a `clone()` method on the revertible object.

```ts
interface Revertible {
	revert(): void;
	dispose(): void;
	clone(branch?: Branch): Revertible;
}
```

Note the optional `branch` parameter to the clone method.
If a branch is provided, then the resulting clone is associated with that branch (recall that every revertible is associated with one branch, which is the branch that the revert is applied to when `revert()` is called);
If a branch is not provided, then the clone is associated with the same branch as the original revertible.
The cloned revertibles may be disposed, just like the original revertibles.

> Disposing a clone doesn't affect original.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Disposing a clone doesn't affect the original.
```

There is one additional consequence of associating a revertible with a branch.
When a branch is disposed, all revertibles that are associated with it are also automatically disposed.

> This makes sense because those revertibles could not possible do anything thereafter (they can't modify a disposed branch).

Reviewer: This is not quite true because you could still associated them with a new branch by cloning them. I don't think that's a use case we ought to worry about, but just FYI.

Author: Interesting. If you did that, then the clones would be just as useless, no? They can't revert either, because the repair data is gone. That makes me think we should throw an error if you try to clone a disposed revertible. Technically we only need to throw an error if _all_ revertibles for that commit are disposed, but that's a confusing distinction.

Author: Oh, but that's exactly what you are pointing out - there can be other outstanding revertibles for that commit but for different branches. Yea, kind of weird.

   
If we make revertibles dispose themselves by default after reverting:

```ts
interface Revertible {
	revert(dispose = true): void; // Pass `false` to prevent disposal
	dispose(): void;
	clone(branch?: Branch): Revertible;
}
```

Then scenario 3 doesn't even have to dispose the clone, and can do it all in one go: `revertible.clone(branch).revert()`.

One way to categorize the scenarios above is that 1 and 2 are "preemptive" - the application is doing a clone ahead of time and giving ownership of that clone to a specific scope.
That scope has a limited lifetime and will dispose the clone when it dies.
Scenario 3, on the other hand, is not preemptive but rather applies the revert to a branch only at the moment when it is necessary - the branch is not known ahead of time.
Supporting both of these kinds of scenarios is straightforward with this API.

> Open question: should disposing a clone also dispose transitive clones that originated from it?
> In a strictly hierarchical branching setup, this makes sense, but branches can have an arbitrary fork and merge structure.

> ## Altenatives

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Alternatives
```
